Add ADR for TAD tool development (#104)
MinBZK/ai-validation: docs/Projects/TAD/ADRs/0003-tad-tool.md

# ADR-0003 Tool for Transparency of Algorithmic Decision making

## Context

We are considering tooling for organizations to get more grip on their algorithms.
Tooling for, for instance bias and fairness tests, and assessments (like [IAMA](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/02/25/impact-assessment-mensenrechten-en-algoritmes)).

Transparency, we think, can be fostered by sharing reports from such a tool in a [standardized way](../Reporting-Standard/latest.md).

There are several existing open source

> [tools](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools/) which

Reviewer: @uittenbroekrobbert did you test the rendering?

we [have assessed](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools_comparison/).
Some support only assessments, others already combine more features and can generate a report.
There is however no tool
that supports all the [requirements](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/requirements/) we have.

> These are our main requirements:

Reviewer 2: In the requirements we refer to `project`, but in our case it's a project in the context of developing an algorithm. Or Algorithm System. What do we think of replacing project by something like `Algorithm System`?

Author: Tricky. I think project can apply to both situations, but do agreed the word project is not ideal. Then again, I don't think Algoritm System is the best replacement. I would suggested renaming the sentences containing 'the project' to something more general, but the requirements is also 'copied' to all the checklists so it is quite a refactor (though search/replace could solve that). So, I'll leave this for you and @anneschuth to reflect upon :)

Reviewer 2: @uittenbroekrobbert let's not make this a merge blocker. In the context of the AI Validation Team people can get an idea about which kind of projects we are talking about.

> These are our main requirements:

Reviewer 2: Should we add an requirement about multi language? A.o. besides Dutch, that it also supports Fries?

Author: It is listed in the other requirements, but to accommodate for it, we could include it also here like:
* The tool supports a multilingual user interface, initially in Dutch and possibly Frysian

Reviewer 2: @uittenbroekrobbert what do you think of replacing `possibly` with `in the future`?

> The tool supports a multilingual user interface, initially in Dutch and in the future also Frisian

> These are our main requirements:

Reviewer 2: What do we think of adding a requirement that the tool can provide an overview of multiple AI systems? That it can be used as an internal register for algorithms?

Author: I think that is a good idea. Should it be:
- multiple projects with 1 algorithm each
- multiple projects with multiple algorithms
and if the second, does it re-use components (like an IAMA applies to 2 algorithms), but it does generate 2 system cards?

> These are our main requirements:

Reviewer 2: I would propose to add a requirement like:

> The tool offers an option, including approval system, to publish algorithms using a subset of the information from a system card in public registers such as The Dutch Algorithm Register.

Author: While adding this I remember having discussions on the 'single source of truth'.. so if the register should point to the system card rather than having the system card (information) uploaded to the register.. so.. I am not sure what applies (and if maybe this should be added later?) @anneschuth  @robbertbos

Reviewer 2: @uittenbroekrobbert I agree that with the idea that the single source of truth should be the project where the AI System Card is hosted, so this requirement is a little bit confusing. Let's ignore it for now.

* The tool offers A one-stop shop for all aspects of the project for all stakeholders for all tasks.
* The tool supports a workflow to track different stages of the project, it should support lifecycle management.
* The tool can run many technical tests on a model.
* The tool supports filling out assessments.

> * The tool supports capturing discussion around technical tests and assessments.

Reviewer 2: I would propose to extend this a little bit more. For example, that it supports not only capturing discussions but also collaboration. For example with features like mentions, (email) notifications, status updates, etc. What do you think of this?

* The tool offers UI access to the above requirements.
* The tool can save results to a system card (or cards supported by system cards, like model, metrics and assessment).
* The tool can commit the different cards to a VCS, such as git, to allow for an audit trail.

## Assumptions

* Collaborating or extending another project will not give us the tool we are looking for.
* We can reuse certain components, like the
[plugins from AIVerify](https://github.com/IMDA-BTG/aiverify/tree/main/stock-plugins), or existing libraries,
for technical tests.
* The tool will use a design based on loose coupled modules. This can be done by scanning directories,
  to gather modules that implement a certain Interface.

> * Plugins will have to implement an Interface to be picked up by the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Plugins will have to implement an interface to be picked up by the system.
```

* We can, to some extend, re-use the already existing POCs or findings from these POCs.

## Decision

We will build our own solution. Where possible this solution should be able to re-use certain

> components of other [related open-source projects](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
components of other [related open-source projects](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools.md).
```

## Assumptions

* Collaborating or extending another project will not give us the tool we are looking for.
* We can reuse certain components, like the
[plugins from AIVerify](https://github.com/IMDA-BTG/aiverify/tree/main/stock-plugins), or existing libraries,
for technical tests.
* The tool will use a design based on loose coupled modules. This can be done by scanning directories,
  to gather modules that implement a certain Interface.
* Plugins will have to implement an Interface to be picked up by the system.
* We can, to some extend, re-use the already existing POCs or findings from these POCs.

## Decision

We will develop our own tool. Where possible this tool should be able to re-use certain components of other open-source
tools.

## Risks

* It is a lot of work to create our own tool.
* We may not have sufficient knowledge of existing technical tests to incorporate them successfully.
* We may struggle to get uptake of the tool if we are not aligned with envisioned users of the tool.

## Consequences

We will have a tool that is tailored to our needs and we do not have to discuss the direction we take and choices we make

> with third parties outside our organization.

Reviewer: I believe we had other wording here, right? Can't see my comment anymore

Author: Indeed we did, the comment is 'hidden' a bit above this discussion due to being 'outdate' (which I guess happens when using (sometimes?) when using force push)..

The last thumbs up was on this:

```suggestion
## Consequences
We can develop a solution that is tailored to the needs of our stakeholders.
```

# ADR-0003 Tool for Transparency of Algorithmic Decision making

## Context

We are considering tooling for organizations to get more grip on their algorithms.
Tooling for, for instance bias and fairness tests, and assessments (like [IAMA](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/02/25/impact-assessment-mensenrechten-en-algoritmes)).

Transparency, we think, can be fostered by sharing reports from such a tool in a [standardized way](../Reporting-Standard/latest.md).

There are several existing open source
[tools](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools.md) which
we [have assessed](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/tools_comparison.md).
Some support only assessments, others already combine more features and can generate a report.
There is however no tool
that supports all the [requirements](../Existing-Tools/Comparison/requirements.md) we have.

These are our main requirements of our tool:

* it offers a one-stop shop for all aspects of the project for all stakeholders for all tasks.
* it supports a workflow to track different stages of the project, it should support lifecycle management.
* it can run many technical tests on a model.
* it supports filling out assessments.

> * it supports capturing discussion and collaboration around technical tests and assessments,
> with features like f.e. mentions, (email) notifications and status updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* it supports capturing discussion and collaboration around technical tests and assessments,
  with features like f.e. mentions, (email) notifications and status updates.
```

* it offers UI access to the above requirements.
* it can save results to a system card (or cards supported by system cards, like model, metrics and assessment).
* it can commit the different cards to a VCS, such as git, to allow for an audit trail.
* it supports a multilingual user interface, initially in Dutch and in the future Frisian.
* it supports multiple projects with one or multiple algorithms.

## Assumptions

* Collaborating or extending another project will not give us the tool we are looking for.

> * We can reuse certain components, like the
> [plugins from AIVerify](https://github.com/IMDA-BTG/aiverify/tree/main/stock-plugins), or existing libraries,
> for technical tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We can reuse certain components, like the
  [plugins from AIVerify](https://github.com/IMDA-BTG/aiverify/tree/main/stock-plugins), or existing libraries,
  for technical tests.
```
